--- PAGE 1 ---
Computer Engineering 4DK4
Lab #1
Performance of Single Server Queueing Systems
Queueing systems occur when “customers” arrive to a system to obtain “service”.
When there is limited service capacity, the customers may be allowed to “queue up”
and wait their turn before they can obtain the service that they require. Real-world
queueing systems are almost everywhere. At a grocery store, for example, shoppers
(customers) often must wait in line (i.e., queueing up in ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served order)
until the cashier (the server) is free before obtaining service. In computer networks,
customers may consist of data packets that arrive to an Internet router and must be
buffered (queued up) while waiting for transmission on an outgoing data link (the
server). This process may incur delays that affect the quality of the service that the
network can provide. Knowledge of queueing system performance is therefore an
important key to understanding the behaviour of packet switched networks such as the
Internet.
This lab is an introduction to the performance of single-server queueing systems.
A program written in C is used to investigate the behaviour of single server queue-
ing systems where customers with ﬁxed service times arrive according to a Poisson
process. A single server queue is often drawn as follows.
serverqueue
arrivals departures
Customers arrive to the system at the left, wait in the queue until the server is free and
eventually enter the server for a time duration known as their service time. Eventually
the customer departs the system on the right. The C program is very simple and does
not distinguish between customers, but merely keeps track of time, the total number of
customers in the system, and various other information. Based on this, it determines
whether the next event to occur is a customer arrival or a customer departure.
1 Purpose
The purpose of this lab is to explore the performance of M/D/1 and M/M/1 queueing systems
through structured experimentation. You will investigate how delay, utilization, and queue length
behave under different trafﬁc intensities. Particular emphasis is placed on understanding the im-
portance of the stability condition and observing how system behavior changes as trafﬁc intensity
approaches and exceeds one.
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Preparation
1. It is important that you attend the lectures that introduce the C program to be used. You will
be responsible for knowing how the simulator works.
2. An electronic copy of the simulation program must ﬁrst be obtained from the course web
site. The name of the program is coe4dk4 lab 1.c. You must also obtain a copy of
the simlib.c, simlib.h and trace.h library ﬁles that you will compile and link
together with coe4dk4 lab 1c. Everything needed is zipped together in a single ﬁle,
coe4dk4 lab 1.zip, available on the course web site.
3. Set SERVICE TIME = 1 + (the last digit of one team member’s student ID). This is ﬁxed
for the entire lab.
4. Familiarize yourself with running the simulation program. When the simulation ﬁnishes
a run, it writes output on the screen. There are various parameters such as the customer
ARRIVAL RATE, SERVICE TIME and NUMBER TO SERVE which you can set near the
top of the simulation. For each change in the simulation you must recompile and run the
program. Once you are familiar with compiling and running the program, continue on and
perform the following experiments. 1.
3 Experiments
1. The offered trafﬁc load of a queueing system is deﬁned asρ = mean arrival rate×mean service time.
For a single-server inﬁnite-buffer system, the conditionρ< 1 is required forstability. When
ρ is close to 1 but still less than 1, the system operates in the near-critical region. When
ρ ≥ 1, the system is unstable or overloaded.
For a stable system, steady-state performance measures such as mean delay, mean number
(of customers) in the system, and server utilization converge to constant values as simulation
time increases. A queueing system is in the steady state if its statistical behavior no longer
changes with time. A single-server inﬁnite-buffer system never enters the steady state if
ρ ≥ 1.
In the code provided,ARRIVAL RATE represents the mean arrival rate andSERVICE TIME
represents the mean service time. Unless otherwise stated, the SERVICE TIME is ﬁxed.
You will vary the ARRIVAL RATE to change the offered trafﬁc load. NUMBER TO SERVE
controls the simulation run length.
Begin with a large value of NUMBER TO SERVE, e.g., 106, and observe how the perfor-
mance metrics, including mean delay, mean number (of customers) in the system, and server
utilization, vary across different RANDOM SEED values for systems operating inclearly sta-
ble, near-critical, and unstable regions. Deﬁne your own boundary between the clearly
1Rather than manually performing each simulation run, you may prefer to wrap the provided code in loops while
changing the various parameters. The multiple runs can then be automated.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
stable and near-critical regions. Then reduce NUMBER TO SERVE to 104 and 102, and again
examine the variability across RANDOM SEED values in each of the stability regions.
Based on your observations, answer these questions:
i) Under what conditions are results sensitive to the random seed?
ii) Under what conditions are results sensitive to the simulation run length?
iii) For a clearly stable system, how can you determine whether the reported metrics rep-
resent steady-state performance?
iv) For a system whose parameters are unknown, is it possible to infer its stability based
on simulation output?
2. In this part, consider only stable conﬁgurations (ρ< 1).
Generate a plot of mean delay vs. ARRIVAL RATE. The value for mean delay that you plot
should be the average of the values you obtain for different random generator seeds at a
particular value of ARRIVAL RATE.
Answer these questions:
i) Explain the reason for the mean delay value at low ARRIVAL RATE values, i.e., What
is the mean delay axis intercept in terms of the other system parameters?
ii) Explain the behaviour of the mean delay as the ARRIVAL RATE increases and the of-
fered trafﬁc load approaches 1. What is the value of the ARRIVAL RATE axis asymp-
tote when this happens? Explain the shape of the mean delay curve obtained.
iii) Can you collect the variance of the delay experienced by individual customers using
the given code, why?
3. Modify the program so that instead of M/D/1 you simulate an M/M/1 queuing system,
i.e., instead of Poisson process arrivals and deterministic service times, the system now
has Poisson arrivals and exponentially distributed service times with the same mean of
SERVICE TIME i.e., when the program needs a service time,
exponential generator((double)SERVICE TIME);
will return an exponentially distributed service time with the proper mean2.
Plot curves to study the performance. Plot the mean delay vs. ARRIVAL RATE for the
M/D/1 and M/M/1 cases on the same graph and explain the differences and similarities.
4. Repeat Part 3 but this time set the SERVICE TIME to be double of the value in Part 3
and vary ARRIVAL RATE over a suitable range. Note that the suitable range should cover
the clearly stable and near-critical regions, and avoid the unstable region. Compare the
mean delay, mean number of customers, and server utilization vs. ARRIVAL RATE curve
to what you obtained before. Compare the curves with the ones from Part 3 and explain the
differences. Instead of using the ARRIVAL RATE as the x-axis, if you change the x-axis to
beρ, how does it affect your observations?
2Read a description of the M/M/1 queue at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M/M/1 queue.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
5. Using Queueing Theory it can be shown that the mean delay, including both the queueing
delay and service time, for a work conserving single server queueing system with Poisson
process arrivals and a general service time distribution (i.e., an M/G/1 queue) is given by3
dM/G/1 =X + λX 2
2(1 −ρ) (1)
whereX is the mean service time ( SERVICE TIME),ρ is the product of the mean arrival
rate and the mean service time, i.e., ρ =λX,λ = ARRIVAL RATE, andX 2 =σ2
X + ¯X 2 is
the second moment of the service time4. Note that the total delay of a customer is the sum of
its service time and its queueing delay. Therefore, the two terms in Equation 1 are the mean
service time and the mean queueing delay incurred by the customers, respectively.
When the service times are ﬁxed (i.e., an M/D/1 queue, as in the supplied simulation),σX =
0, and therefore, the mean delay can be written as
dM/D/1 =
¯X(2 −ρ)
2(1 −ρ) (2)
When the service times are exponentially distributed,σ2
X = ¯X 2,X 2 =σ2
X + ¯X 2 = 2 ¯X 2 and
therefore, the mean delay can be written as
dM/M/1 =
¯X
1 −ρ (3)
Compare the results that you plotted above to this analytic result. (As you can see that the
mean delay formulas only apply to systems whenρ< 1. )
6. Modify the code so that it simulates a single server queueing system with a maximum queue
size, e.g., deﬁne MAX_QUEUE_SIZE at the top of the simulation. When a customer ar-
rives and ﬁnds that the number in the queue is at its maximum, the arriving customer is
rejected from the system without being served. At the end of each simulation run, output
the customer rejection probability, i.e., the ratio of the number of rejected customers to the
total number of customer arrivals. Note that only served customers are included in the mean
delay calculation.
In this type of system, there is no limit on the arrival rate that can be used, since customers
that ﬁnd a full queue will simply be rejected, i.e., the queue can never grow larger than
MAX_QUEUE_SIZE. For this reason,ρ< 1 does not have to be true.
Without running your simulation, answer the following questions:
i) What is the maximum delay a customer may experience?
ii) What is the maximum rejection rate (or fraction) of customers?
3Read a description of the M/G/1 queue at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M/G/1 queue.
4Equation 1 is known as the Pollaczek-Khinchine formula. See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pollaczek-Khinchine formula.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
For various values of MAX_QUEUE_SIZE, plot the mean customer delay versus arrival rate
and the rejection fraction versus the arrival rate.
Choose appropriate values of MAX_QUEUE_SIZE and suitable ranges of arrival rates so
that you can observe both the mean customer delay and the rejection fraction change asymp-
totically from near zero to their respective maximum values. Discuss the differences and
similarities between the inﬁnite and ﬁnite queue cases. For which parameter settings was
it most difﬁcult to generate mean delay or rejection fraction curves that span the full range
from near zero to their theoretical maximum values? Explain why.
4 Writeup
Each group (maximum of three students) should submit a single writeup for the lab. The writeup
should clearly document your experiments, results, observations, and answers to the questions
posed in Section 3.
1. Experimental setup: Describe the parameter values used in each experiment, including the
arrival rates, service times, simulation run lengths, queue sizes (where applicable), and ran-
dom number generator seeds. Clearly indicate which parameters were varied and which
were held ﬁxed.
2. Results and plots: Include all plots requested in Section 3. Unless otherwise indicated,
choose parameter ranges that adequately illustrate the behavior of the system from low to
high trafﬁc load. Clearly label all axes, curves, and relevant parameter values. When multiple
curves are being compared, present them on the same graph where appropriate.
3. Discussion: Explain the important features and trends observed in your results rather than
simply describing the shapes of the curves. Address all questions posed in Section 3 and
relate your observations to the queueing concepts discussed in the lab, including stability,
steady-state behavior, trafﬁc load, and ﬁnite versus inﬁnite queue capacity.
4. Analytical comparison: Where analytical results are provided, compare your simulation re-
sults with the corresponding theoretical predictions. Discuss any noticeable differences and
possible reasons for them.
5. Simulation reliability: Where applicable, discuss the effects of simulation run length and
random number generator seed on your results. Make sure that the simulation settings used
to generate your ﬁnal performance curves provide sufﬁciently reliable results.
6. Code modiﬁcations: Include a listing of the portions of the supplied simulation code that
you modiﬁed. You do not need to include unchanged portions of the supplied code.
7. Performance curves should show the underlying simulation results clearly. Do not use
piecewise-linear interpolation or overﬁtted curves to connect or smooth the simulation data.
5